The Project Gutenberg eBook of In the Year Ten Thousand, by William Harben

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: In the Year Ten Thousand

Author: William Harben

Editor: B. O. Flower

Release Date: January 7, 2022 [eBook #67122]

Language: English

Produced by: Roger Frank and Sue Clark

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE YEAR TEN THOUSAND ***


                      IN THE YEAR TEN THOUSAND.

                          BY WILLIAM HARBEN.



A. D. 10,000. An old man, more than six hundred years of age, was
walking with a boy through a great museum. The people who were moving
around them had beautiful forms, and faces which were indescribably
refined and spiritual.

“Father,” said the boy, “you promised to tell me to-day about the Dark
Ages. I like to hear how men lived and thought long ago.”

“It is no easy task to make you understand the past,” was the reply.
“It is hard to realize that man could have been so ignorant as he was
eight thousand years ago, but come with me; I will show you
something.”

He led the boy to a cabinet containing a few time-worn books bound in
solid gold.

“You have never seen a book,” he said, taking out a large volume and
carefully placing it on a silk cushion on a table. “There are only a
few in the leading museums of the world. Time was when there were as
many books on earth as inhabitants.”

“I cannot understand,” said the boy with a look of perplexity on his
intellectual face. “I cannot see what people could have wanted with
them; they are not attractive; they seem to be useless.”

The old man smiled. “When I was your age, the subject was too deep for
me; but as I grew older and made a close study of the history of the
past, the use of books gradually became plain to me. We know that in
the year 2000 they were read by the best minds. To make you understand
this, I shall first have to explain that eight thousand years ago
human beings communicated their thoughts to one another by making
sounds with their tongues, and not by mind-reading, as you and I do.
To understand me, you have simply to read my thoughts as well as your
education will permit; but primitive man knew nothing about
thought-intercourse, so he invented speech. Humanity then was divided
up in various races, and each race had a separate language. As certain
sounds conveyed definite ideas, so did signs and letters; and later,
to facilitate the exchange of thought, writing and printing were
invented. This book was printed.”

The boy leaned forward and examined the pages closely; his young brow
clouded. “I cannot understand,” he said, “it seems so useless.”

The old man put his delicate fingers on the page. “A line of these
words may have conveyed a valuable thought to a reader long ago,” he
said, reflectively. “In fact, this book purports to be a history of
the world up to the year 2000. Here are some pictures,” he continued,
turning the worn leaves carefully. “This is George Washington; this a
pope of a church called the Roman Catholic; this is a man named
Gladstone, who was a great political leader in England. Pictures then,
as you see, were very crude. We have preserved some of the oil
paintings made in those days. Art was in its cradle. In producing a
painting of an object, the early artists mixed colored paints and
spread them according to taste on stretched canvas or on the walls or
windows of buildings. You know that our artists simply throw light and
darkness into space in the necessary variations, and the effect is all
that could be desired in the way of imitating nature. See that
landscape in the alcove before you. The foliage of the trees, the
grass, the flowers, the stretch of water, have every appearance of
life because the light which produces them is alive.”

The boy looked at the scene admiringly for a few minutes, then bent
again over the book. Presently he recoiled from the pictures, a
strange look of disgust struggling in his tender features.

“These men have awful faces,” he said. “They are so unlike people
living now. The man you call a pope looks like an animal. They all
have huge mouths and frightfully heavy jaws. Surely men could not have
looked like that.”

“Yes,” the old man replied, gently. “There is no doubt that human
beings then bore a nearer resemblance to the lower animals than we now
do. In the sculpture and portraits of all ages we can trace a gradual
refinement in the appearances of men. The features of the human race
to-day are more ideal. Thought has always given form and expression to
faces. In those dark days the thoughts of men were not refined. Human
beings died of starvation and lack of attention in cities where there
were people so wealthy that they could not use their fortunes. And
they were so nearly related to the lower animals that they believed in
war. George Washington was for several centuries reverenced by
millions of people as a great and good man; and yet under his
leadership thousands of human beings lost their lives in battle.”

The boy’s susceptible face turned white.

“Do you mean that he encouraged men to kill one another?” he asked,
bending more closely over the book.

“Yes, but we cannot blame him; he thought he was right. Millions of
his countrymen applauded him. A greater warrior than he was a man
named Napoleon Bonaparte. Washington fought under the belief that he
was doing his country a service in defending it against enemies, but
everything in history goes to prove that Bonaparte waged war to
gratify a personal ambition to distinguish himself as a hero. Wild
animals of the lowest orders were courageous, and would fight one
another till they died; and yet the most refined of the human race,
eight or nine thousand years ago, prided themselves on the same
ferocity of nature. Women, the gentlest half of humanity, honored men
more for bold achievements in shedding blood than for any other
quality. But murder was not only committed in wars; men in private
life killed one another; fathers and mothers were now and then so
depraved as to put their own children to death; and the highest
tribunals of the world executed murderers without dreaming that it was
wrong, erroneously believing that to kill was the only way to prevent
killing.”

“Did no one in those days realize that it was horrible?” asked the
youth.

“Yes,” answered the father, “as far back as ten thousand years ago
there was an humble man, it is said, who was called Jesus Christ. He
went from place to place, telling every one he met that the world
would be better if men would love one another as themselves.”

“What kind of man was he?” asked the boy, with kindling eyes.

“He was a spiritual genius,” was the earnest reply, “and the greatest
that has ever lived.”

“Did he prevent them from killing one another?” asked the youth, with
a tender upward glance.

“No, for he himself was killed by men who were too barbarous to
understand him. But long after his death his words were remembered.
People were not civilized enough to put his teachings into practice,
but they were able to see that he was right.”

“After he was killed, did the people not do as he had told them?”
asked the youth, after a pause of several minutes.

“It seems not,” was the reply. “They said no human being could live as
he had directed. And when he had been dead for several centuries,
people began to say that he was the Son of God who had come to earth
to show men how to live. Some even believed that he was God himself.”

“Did they believe that he was a person like ourselves?”

The old man reflected for a few minutes, then, looking into the boy’s
eager face, he answered: “That subject will be hard for you to
understand. I will try to make it plain. To the unformed minds of
early humanity there could be nothing without a personal creator. As
man could build a house with his own hands, and was superior to his
work, so he argued that some unknown being, greater than all visible
things, had made the universe. They called that being by different
names according to the language they spoke. In English the word used
was ‘God.’”

“They believed that somebody had made the universe!” said the boy,
“how very strange!”

“No, not somebody as you comprehend it,” replied the father gently,
“but some vague, infinite being who punished the evil and rewarded the
good. Men could form no idea of a creator that did not in some way
resemble themselves; and as they could subdue their enemies through
fear and by the infliction of pain, so did they believe that God would
punish those who did not please him. Some people long ago believed
that God’s punishment was inflicted after death for eternity. The
numerous beliefs about the personality and laws of the creator caused
more bloodshed in the gloomy days of the past than anything else.
Religion was the foundation of many of the most horrible wars. People
committed thousands of crimes in the name of the God of the universe.
Men and women were burned alive because they would not believe certain
creeds, and yet they adhered to convictions equally as preposterous;
but you will learn all these things later in life. That picture before
you was the last queen of England, called Victoria.”

“I hoped that the women would not have such repulsive features as the
men,” said the boy, looking critically at the picture, “but this face
makes me shudder. Why do they all look so coarse and brutal?”

“People living when this queen reigned had the most degrading habit
that ever blackened the history of mankind.”

“What was that?” asked the youth.

“The consumption of flesh. They believed that animals, fowls, and fish
were created to be eaten.”

“Is it possible?” The boy shuddered convulsively, and turned away from
the book. “I understand now why their faces repel me so. I do not like
to think that we have descended from such people.”

“They knew no better,” said the father. “As they gradually became more
refined they learned to burn the meat over flames and to cook it in
heated vessels to change its appearance. The places where animals were
killed and sold were withdrawn to retired places. Mankind was slowly
turning from the habit, but they did not know it. As early as 2050
learned men, calling themselves vegetarians, proved conclusively that
the consumption of such food was cruel and barbarous, and that it
retarded refinement and mental growth. However, it was not till about
2300 that the vegetarian movement became of marked importance. The
most highly educated classes in all lands adopted vegetarianism, and
only the uneducated continued to kill and eat animals. The vegetarians
tried for years to enact laws prohibiting the consumption of flesh,
but opposition was very strong. In America in 2320 a colony was formed
consisting of about three hundred thousand vegetarians. They purchased
large tracts of land in what was known as the Indian Territory, and
there made their homes, determined to prove by example the efficacy of
their tenets. Within the first year the colony had doubled its number:
people joined it from all parts of the globe. In the year 4000 it was
a country of its own, and was the wonder of the world. The brightest
minds were born there. The greatest discoveries and inventions were
made by its inhabitants. In 4030 Gillette discovered the process of
manufacturing crystal. Up to that time people had built their houses
of natural stone, inflammable wood, and metals; but the new material,
being fireproof and beautiful in its various colors, was used for all
building purposes. In 4050 Holloway found the submerged succession of
mountain chains across the Atlantic Ocean, and intended to construct a
bridge on their summits; but the vast improvement in air ships
rendered his plans impracticable.

“In 4051 John Saunders discovered and put into practice
thought-telegraphy. This discovery was the signal for the introduction
in schools and colleges of the science of mind-reading, and by the
year 5000 so great had been the progress in that branch of knowledge
that words were spoken only among the lowest of the uneducated. In no
age of the world’s history has there been such an important discovery.
It civilized the world. Its early promoters did not dream of the vast
good mind-reading would accomplish. Slowly it killed evil. Societies
for the prevention of evil thought were organized in all lands.
Children were born pure of mind and grew up in purity. Crime was
choked out of existence. If a man had an evil thought, it was read in
his heart, and he was not allowed to keep it. Men at first shunned
evil for fear of detection, and then grew to love purity.

“In the year 6021 all countries of the world, having then a common
language, and being drawn together in brotherly love by constant
exchange of thought, agreed to call themselves a union without ruler
or rulers. It was the greatest event in the history of the world.
Certain sensitive mind students in Germany, who had for years been
trying to communicate with other planets through the channel of
thought, declared that, owing to the terrestrial unanimity of purpose
in that direction, they had received mental impressions from other
worlds, and that thorough interplanetary intercourse was a future
possibility.

“Important inventions were made as the mind of humanity grew more
elevated. Thornton discovered the plan to heat the earth’s surface
from its internal fire, and this discovery made journeys to the
wonderful ice-bound countries situated at the North and the South
Poles easy of accomplishment. At the North Pole, in the extensive
concave lands, was found a peculiar race of men. Their sun was the
great perpetually boiling lake of lava which bubbled from the centre
of the earth in the bottom of their bowl-shaped world. And a strange
religion was theirs! They believed that the earth was a monster on
whose hide they had to live for a mortal lifetime, and that to the
good was given the power after death to walk over the icy waste to
their god, whose starry eyes they could see twinkling in space, and
that the evil were condemned to feed the fire in the stomach of the
monster as long as it lived. They told beautiful stories about the
creation of their world, and held that if they lived too near the hot,
dazzling mouth of evil, they would become blinded to the soft,
forgiving eyes of the god of space. Hence they suffered the extreme
cold of the lands near the frozen seas, believing that the physical
ordeal prepared them for the icy journey to immortal rest after death.
But there were those who hungered after the balmy atmosphere and the
wonderful fruits and flowers that grew in the lowlands, and they lived
there in indolence and so-called sin.”

The old man and his son left the museum and walked into a wonderful
park. Flowers of the most beautiful kinds and of sweetest fragrance
grew on all sides. They came to a tall tower, four thousand feet in
height, built of manufactured crystal. Something, like a great white
bird, a thousand feet long, flew across the sky and settled down on
the tower’s summit.

“This was one of the most wonderful inventions of the Seventieth
century,” said the old man. “The early inhabitants of the earth could
not have dreamed that it would be possible to go around it in
twenty-four hours. In fact, there was a time when they were not able
to go around it at all. Scientists were astonished when a man called
Malburn, a great inventor, announced that, at a height of four
thousand feet, he could disconnect an air ship from the laws of
gravitation, and cause it to stand still in space till the earth had
turned over. Fancy what must have been that immortal genius’ feelings
when he stood in space and saw the earth for the first time whirling
beneath him!”

They walked on for some distance across the park till they came to a
great instrument made to magnify the music in light. Here they paused
and seated themselves.

“It will soon be night,” said the old man. “The tones are those of
bleeding sunset. I came here last evening to listen to the musical
struggle between the light of dying day and that of the coming stars.
The sunlight had been playing a powerful solo; but the gentle chorus
of the stars, led by the moon, was inexplicably touching. Light is the
voice of immortality; it speaks in all things.”

An hour passed. It was growing dark.

“Tell me what immortality is,” said the boy. “What does life lead to?”

“We do not know,” replied the old man. “If we knew we would be
infinite. Immortality is increasing happiness for all time; it is” —

A meteor shot across the sky. There was a burst of musical laughter
among the singing stars. The old man bent over the boy’s face and
kissed it. “Immortality,” said he—“immortality must be love immortal.”

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE YEAR TEN THOUSAND ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.